Hello, everyone, I'm Tan Zhipeng from NetEase AI Lab,
and today I'm gonna be talking about ChoreoMaster.
Choreography-oriented, music driven dance synthesis.
To start with, I will first give you some background to show the motivation of our work.
Dance motions are common elements in films and video games,
So, there are rich demands for high-quality 3D dance animation.
However, the production of dance animations is extremely costly and inefficient,
One minute dance animation may cost thousands of (US) dollars and need several weeks to produce,
Besides, the whole task requires skill and expertise in choreography and dancing.
Therefore, many researchers have tried to build automatic dance synthesize systems.
Earlier researchers have tried to use traditional graph-based models to build such tools.
These models are robust, stable and controllable.
However, their fundamental drawbacks are
the underestimation and oversimplification of dance choreography.
And these graph-based models are actually
incapable of modeling the deep cross-modal relationships between music and dance.
Besides, existing methods fail to address widely used choreographic rules.
With the booming of artificial intelligence, various researchers have
proposed deep generative models for music-driven dance motion synthesis.
When properly set up, these methods do appear to better model the choreomusical relationships.
However, their most obvious shortcoming is the poor controllability.
Moreover, high-frequency motion details may be
considered as noises and intentionally ignored during the learning process,
causing some results to be ‘dull’ and ‘blurred’.
Furthermore, existing methods typically lack explicit attention to choreographic rules.
So, the generalizability of the model is limited, and
may generate strange and unaesthetic movements given music outside the training set.
So, what makes a desirable production-ready music-driven dance synthesis tool?
Firstly, users should have complete control over the synthesis process
Secondly,  it should robustly and stably produce high-quality dance motions.
High-quality here means that the results satisfy the chorographic rules
Let's watch two generated dances by our system.
we can see that the result without the choreographic rules
only appear to be a set of dance movements smoothly pieced together,
but overall do not look like a well-composed artform.
So, what's the basic choreographic rules?
Fortunately, after consulting professional artists
and studying choreomusicology, we have found some widely used rules.
The first is the style consistency,
the style of music and body movements should convey similar mood and tone.
The second is the rhythm consistency,
each synchronized dance and music segment should present the same rhythmic pattern.
The third is the structure consistency,
the organization of a dance should be coordinated with the music,
for example, repeated musical phrases are usually assigned with repeated motions.
Based on these rules, we have developed ChoreoMaster,
a choreography-oriented music-driven dance synthesis system.
We designed a choreomusical embedding module,
which learn the style embedding and rhythm embeddings.
The learned embeddings are then incorporated within
a novel graph-based framework, which can generate high-quality dance motions controllably.
Next, we'll show the technical details of our system.
To start with, let's first talk about the relationship between style and rhythm.
Let's look at one example,
we can see that these two dances actually share the same rhythmic pattern,
but present very different visual styles.
So, we can say that style and rhythm are relatively independent.
Another example here,
We can see such soothing music tends to have a much softer rhythm than the ones we just saw.
So, the style and rhythm still have some correlation to each other.
the distribution of rhythmic patterns is strongly related to the musical and dance styles.
To manage such complex style and rhythm relationships,
we have designed a choreomusical embedding network.
On the one hand, since style and rhythm are relatively independent,
we disentangled the style and rhythm embedding network.
We build a choreomusical style embedding network and a choreomusical rhythm embedding network.
This would also improve the system's interpretability and controllability.
On the other hand, since the distribution of rhythmic patterns is related to the music and dance style,
we also concatenate the style embedding with our rhythm embedding network.
Before we talk about the style embedding, an important question is that
why don’t we use a straightforward solution of
manually dividing music and dance into some style categories
We can see from the images that the boundaries
between different music or dance styles are not always so clear.
Moreover, the classification criteria for music and dance styles are different,
most music or dance genres do not have an equivalent tag in its counterpart.
Besides, each main style of music or dance contains numerous sub-styles,
for instance, hip-hop can be further classed as popping, locking, breaking, urban, etc.
Therefore, we adopt a choreomusical style embedding network
to implicitly map music and dance segments into a unified embedding space,
where segments conveying similar mood and tone are closely clustered.
The architecture is illustrated in the figure.
For the music encoding branch Em ,
We adopt the state-of-the-art music tagging network as our backbone.
It is composed of four convolutional block layers and two GRU layers.
We build a symmetrical dance encoding branch Ed, except that we used graph convolutional blocks here.
The music and dance phrases will be compress into 32-dimensional embedding vectors (Zm and Zd)
To benefit from the vast amount of unpaired music and motion data,
we employed a two-stage training procedure.
The first is the separate training stage, both branches are trained independently using unpaired data.
To better reflect latent substyles, we incorporate the unsupervised DEC strategy.
So, the loss function is the sum of the classification loss and the DEC loss.
the second is the joint training phase, we’ll use music and motion pairs to jointly train the two branches.
And we add MSE loss between music and motion embedding into the loss function.
Here is the T-SNE visualization of the style embedding before and after joint training,
we can see that Music-dance pairs have much closer embedding after joint training.
Here is an ablation study on style embedding.
Unlike style, rhythm can be clearly represented using music time signature and musical notation
For instance, in this image a 4/4 time signature indicate that four beats exist in each music meter.
However, matching dance movements to musical rhythm is still a difficult task.
Since, music usually includes multiple instrumental tracks and vocals,
while dances often involve many simultaneously moving joints.
To better understand their rhythmic relationships, we asked professional artists to specify the beat patterns.
By analyzing the results, we found that beat patterns can actually be represented as an 8 bits binary vector,
which we call as rhythm signature
The even bits in the signature denote the regular main beat,
while odd bits represent the half beats.
Consecutive zeros indicate a legato, a smooth period in music and dance motions.
And there are only 13 common rhythm signatures,
and the distance between them can be defined using Hamming distance.
Here we show some examples of rhythm signatures
We designed a Choreomusical Rhythm embedding network to classify the rhythm signature,
as shown in the figure. it comprises music and dance feature extraction,
and a shared block for rhythm signature classification.
Style embeddings are concatenated as input
And Because it's not necessary to train the network from low-level original signals,
we feed the network with extracted music and motion features.
All blocks in this network are jointly trained using labelled paired music and dance data,
The Ldr and Lmr in the loss function stands for the classification loss for dance and music respectively.
Here is an ablation study about rhythm embedding.
The last part of our system is the choreography-oriented graph-based framework.
A motion graph is a directed graph,
where each node denotes a motion segment while each edge represents the transition cost.
Compared with traditional graph building, we have the following main differences.
The first difference it's that we introduce local structural constraint during graph building,
We use dance motion meter instead of dance motion beat as our motion node.
The second it's that we consider Style embedding different when calculating the transition cost.
This could help to avoid some style incompatible transition examples shown in the right.
Besides, dance motions are further augmented by mirroring, blending, shuffling.
Some examples are shown in the right.
We totally achieved 2.56 augmentation rate.
With a motion graph built, we can then optimize new dances for musics.
When given an input piece of music, we will first apply music segmentation and similarity labeling method.
And Similar music meters will be given the same ID.
Then we will find an optimal path in the motion graph that optimize this function.
The function contains three part.
The Data term accounts for the style and rhythm matching cost between music and motion.
the Transition term ensures a smooth transition between adjacent motion segments.
The structure term addresses structural consistency between music and dance.
And we include a repetition constraint and a mirror constraint from the choreographic rules,
The function can be optimized using a dynamic programming algorithm.
Here’s an ablation study on structure constraint
Next, we’ll show some evaluation of our method.
Our database include 19.91 hours of dance motions, and 9.91 hours of them have paired music.
We additionally collected an 102.5 hours of music dataset.
The dance and music will be labeled with two-dimensional styles and rhythm signatures.
The training takes 14 hours and our system only need several seconds to synthesize a dance.
Here we show some results automatically generated by ChoreoMaster.
Our system also supports diversified generation for one music.
by running the optimization several times and skip used motions.
We have compared our method to several alternative dance generation methods
We also performed a user study to help us qualitatively evaluate our method.
We used 30 test music clips, and invited 35 participants, 10 of them are choreographers or artists.
They are asked to rate the dance realism, style, rhythm and structural consistency of the results.
From the table we can see our method achieves higher scores than other methods,
and is close to real dances.
As we have mentioned, the controllability is of vital importance to a production-ready tool,
Here we show how ChoreoMaster can adapt to some common requirements.
The most common demand for artists is to have precise control over the synthesized results,
for instance, forcing some specific dance motions to appear at specific locations,
replacing unwanted motions without affecting other movements, and so on.
Besides, We also support trajectory control by encouraging the character’s root position
to stay close to user-specified locations at specified time points.
Another common requirement is to restrict the range of motion to prevent dancers from moving off the stage.
This can be achieved by adding an extra range constraint to the cost function,
penalizing motions violating the specified ranges
Furthermore, dance motion graph can be also used to assist the creative process
In our system, this can be achieved by lowering the edge transition threshold  T,
and increasing the transition weight lambda11 to encourages more novel transitions.
Although ChoreoMaster has successfully been put into practical use, limitations remain.
Currently, it cannot synthesize dance styles that are absent from the database.
This can be addressed by further expanding our dance database.
Furthermore, we currently only support four-beat music.
Again, further data acquisition can overcome this problem.
Lastly, our system still can’t handle the semantic relationships between dance motions and music lyrics.
It would be interesting to incorporate further techniques into our system, like NLP modules.
Lastly, we thank the reviewers for their constructive comments,
and the artists for giving their time and great expertise to help improve our system.
We thank the user study participants for their time and patience.
This work was supported by the National Key Technology RD Program,
the National Natural Science Foundation of China,
and the Research Grant of Beijing Higher Institution Engineering Research Center.
Thanks for your listening.